GenBridge FINDINGS

Completed work, measurements, and the traps that cost real time.


2026-09-08 (17)  IT WAS NEVER SAVED - AND NOBODY ASKED FOR AN HOUR
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"Saving at 64 seems to have fixed it!" The buffer size lives in the project state, the project had
never been saved after the size was chosen, and every load therefore restored a device with no
remembered buffer at all.

THE EVIDENCE WAS THERE THE WHOLE TIME and was read past repeatedly: every load opened at "frames 512"
with NO mismatch warning, and that warning only fires when a size was actually asked for. So
settings->frames was 0 - "leave the device alone", the default for a device whose buffer nobody has
chosen. Zero is not 512. Anyone reading those two facts together had the answer.

WHAT WAS OFFERED INSTEAD, in order: device contention, a driver minimum, an async read-back race, a
CoreAudio ghost stream, a host call-order problem, and a pointless restore in the middle of a
reopen. Four of those were real defects and are fixed; none of them was this. The question that would
have settled it in one line - "are you saving the project after setting it?" - was not asked until
the sixth attempt, and only then because a diagnostic was being added to answer it mechanically.

THE RULE: when a setting does not persist, establish that it was persisted before theorising about
the persistence mechanism. The cheap question first, every time.

WHAT THE CHASE PRODUCED ANYWAY, all independently worth having:

  - the reconfigure loop (15) - a regression of the author's own making, and by far the worst thing
    in the session: a moving reported latency told the host to reactivate, forever;
  - the shared MIDI destination table (11), dropping notes across every instance once a second;
  - the panel showing the requested buffer rather than the one the device gave (10);
  - the CoreAudio caches made event-driven rather than polled on the host's main thread;
  - device_set_buffer_frames() confirming rather than assuming (12);
  - the ghost-stream wait, so a just-closed stream is not mistaken for another client;
  - no buffer flap through a reopen of the same device (16);
  - and the diagnostics that finally cornered it - the lock-hold breakdown, the saving/restoring
    pair, and the notes in/out row.

A DESIGN QUESTION LEFT OPEN. The device buffer is stored per PROJECT, but it is arguably a property
of the INTERFACE - the same value would be wanted in every project on this machine. Storing it as a
machine-wide preference keyed by device UID, with the project state overriding it, would have made
this whole episode impossible. Not done; see todo.

2026-09-08 (16)  IT WAS A CALL-ORDER PROBLEM, AND A POINTLESS RESTORE ON TOP OF IT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT: "Maybe it's a call order thing then?" It was, and his own log said so once the loop from (15)
was out of the way:

    open Analog Rytm ... frames 512 ... reported latency 1664
    open KRONOS      ... frames 512 ... reported latency 1812
    open Analog Rytm ... frames 512
    open Analog Rytm ... frames 64  ... reported latency 976

Both devices come up at 512 with NO mismatch warning - which is the tell, because that warning only
fires when a size was asked for. Nothing was asked for. A device with no remembered entry gets
frames = 0, "leave the device alone", which is the right default for an uninvited global change; and
the entry only exists once setState has parsed the project blob.

So if the device parameter reaches the plug-in before setState does - through the controller, or as
a parameter change in the first process() calls - the device is opened before the saved buffer size
has been read, and the size then lands in remembered[] with nothing left to apply it. Restored
correctly and never reached the device.

REACT TO THE LATE ARRIVAL RATHER THAN GUESS AT THE ORDER. setState() now asks for the device again
if one was already open when the blob arrived. request_device() is debounced, so a host that DID
call in the tidy order coalesces it into the open it was going to do anyway.

AND THE RESTORE IN THE MIDDLE OF A REOPEN. reconfigure() closes and reopens, and close_capture_locked()
was handing the buffer back to what it found in between - so every reconfigure drove the device
64 -> 512 -> 64. Between the two it really IS at 512, which is what gets read off the panel. On these
USB interfaces each leg costs over a second, so the window is long enough to catch by hand. The
record is kept so the eventual real close still hands the device back; only the pointless middle is
skipped.

WHAT IS LEFT IS COREAUDIO'S OWN COST, and it is large: closing an Analog Rytm takes 3.6 SECONDS and
opening it 1.4, measured. Holding configLock across those is the outstanding item - see the todo.
The plug-in cannot make a device open faster; it can stop making the host wait for it.

2026-09-08 (15)  A MOVING LATENCY IS AN INSTRUCTION TO THE HOST - REVERTED
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT's own Live session wrote into the shared log, and the loop is unmistakable:

    open Analog Rytm ... frames 64 ... reported latency 656
    reconfigure held configLock for 1462 ms (close+probe 0, rate+buffer 4, open 1458)
    latency now 1876 samples - asked the host to re-read it
    restored device settings: 512 frames, 0 Hz
    reconfigure: slot 3 ... open Analog Rytm ... frames 64
    reconfigure held configLock for 1453 ms
    ... for ever, about every one and a half seconds

CAUSED BY 2026-09-08 (7), WHICH WAS MINE. Reporting a smoothed measurement instead of the ring's
setpoint removed a real 4-9 ms over-compensation and bought something far worse. The figure MOVES -
1276, then 1212, then 1146 - and every move past the deadband told the host its latency had changed.
A host answers that by REACTIVATING the plug-in. Reactivation closes the device, which restores its
buffer to the 512 it had before, and reopens it at 64; that perturbs the ring; the figure moves
again. One feedback loop giving both symptoms at once:

  - the beachball, since each turn of it holds configLock for ~1460 ms and every host-thread entry
    point waits behind that;
  - "I set 64 and I get 512", because the device really is flapping between the two, and reading the
    panel between turns catches it at 512.

A LATENCY A HOST IS TOLD MUST BE STABLE. That is the lesson and it is not a small one:
getLatencySamples() is not a readout, it is a contract, and changing it is a command with
consequences that reach the whole session. The figure is back to the setpoint, which moves only when
something structural does - a device, a rate, a buffer, a retune, the trim.

THE MEASUREMENT SURVIVES AS A DIAGNOSTIC. pipelineAvg is still computed and still published beside
the reported figure as "actual", so the gap that started this is visible. The way to close it is to
make the ring actually sit where the setpoint says - see the todo about the ring running below its
setpoint - not to chase it with a number the host acts on.

WHAT THE LOG DID THAT AN ARGUMENT COULD NOT. Four exchanges of theory about contention, races and
driver minimums; one paste of the owner's own log lines and the cause was in the first six of them.
The shared log file - the same one that misled earlier by mixing processes - is worth every bit of
the attribution that makes it readable.

2026-09-08 (14)  THE SPINNING CURSOR IS device_open(), MEASURED AT 1432 ms UNDER THE LOCK
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT offered to run diagnostics under Ableton. The diagnostics found it here first.

Two log lines now bracket the lock every host-thread entry point waits on. From this rig:

    reconfigure held configLock for 1437 ms (close+probe 0, rate+buffer 4, open 1432)

CoreAudio's own device_open is the whole of it. Not the idle wait added today (0 ms), not the buffer
set and its confirm (4 ms) - those were the obvious suspects and both are nothing. A device that
takes a second and a half to start is the device's business; holding a lock across it is ours.

WHAT WAITS BEHIND IT: getState(), setState() and setupProcessing(), all of which Ableton calls on
its main thread - getState() for undo snapshots on ordinary UI actions. And a reconfigure is not a
rare event: the offset arrows cause one through the latency change. lock_config_from_host() reports
the wait from the other side, so a session that beachballs without those lines is beachballing for
some other reason - which is worth as much as the positive.

THE SHAPE OF THE FIX, written down while it is fresh rather than attempted at the end of a long
session: close under the lock and leave running = false; do the device properties, the ring and
resampler build, and device_open OUTSIDE it - the audio thread already returns silence while running
is false, and no IOProc exists yet to touch the ring; retake the lock only to set running = true and
publish. The one cost is that a host saving DURING a swap reads the previous device, which is honest
enough for a state that is genuinely mid-change.

ALSO CONFIRMED: THE LATE BUFFER NOW TAKES. The harness restored in the wrong order - buffer first,
then device - which opens the device already knowing the size it wants and never exercises the path
that failed. A host walks parameters by id, so the device (0) comes before the buffer (3). Corrected,
and with the ghost wait in place the KRONOS now reaches "frames 64, devlat 212, reported 1124" on the
SECOND reconfigure, which is the sequence CT sees on project load.

2026-09-08 (13)  THE 512 IS DELIBERATE - THE DEVICE IS SHARED WITH THE HOST
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
With Live quit, the KRONOS takes 64 immediately: frames 64, devlat 212, reported latency 1124
(23.4 ms), measured 8.6-11.1 ms across five trips. Every check passes. With Live running it is 512,
every time, and no amount of retrying moves it.

IT IS NOT CONTENTION AND IT IS NOT A RACE - IT IS THIS PLUG-IN'S OWN POLICY, written down in
reconfigure() long before any of this: device_is_running_somewhere() is probed before opening, and if
something else is already driving the device its rate and buffer size are LEFT ALONE. Rate and
buffer are global to a device, so imposing one reaches into every other client of it, and the case
that matters most is a device shared with the host itself. The policy is right. What was missing was
anyone being told.

So the chain is: something in the Live session has the KRONOS running -> GenBridge declines to touch
its buffer -> the device stays at whatever that client set, 512 -> the ring is sized for 512
(1.25 * (512 callback + 512 device + 128 taps) = 1440) and devlat comes out 660 -> 44 ms reported.
Every number CT quoted, from one decision taken for a good reason.

The likeliest holder is Live's own AUDIO INPUT DEVICE. Live takes an input and an output device
separately, so a session whose output is a QU-24 can still have the KRONOS as its input - and Live's
buffer is then the KRONOS's buffer.

THE PANEL NOW SAYS WHICH. "64 samples (shared - device at 512)" rather than "(device gave 512)",
because a refusal and a deliberate hands-off want completely different responses from whoever reads
it - one is a fault to hunt, the other is a routing decision to take. The log line says the ring and
the reported latency follow the other client's size.

THREE EXPLANATIONS IN A ROW FOR ONE SYMPTOM, and the first two were wrong: contention over the
buffer, then an async read-back race. Both were real defects and both are fixed, but neither was
this. The thing that settled it was the owner quitting Live - a controlled experiment that took
thirty seconds and that nothing in the preceding hour of reasoning could substitute for.

2026-09-08 (12)  noErr IS NOT CONFIRMATION - THE BUFFER SET WAS A RACE, NOT CONTENTION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT, once the panel started reporting the mismatch: opening a project with two instances announces
"attempting to set 64, getting 512" on both, and "a manual set to 64 fixes it".

THE SECOND ATTEMPT SUCCEEDING IS THE WHOLE CLUE. Contention does not heal when you ask again - the
other holder still has the device. A race does, because by the second attempt the first one has
landed.

AudioObjectSetPropertyData() returning noErr means the request was ACCEPTED, not that the device has
reconfigured. CoreAudio applies a buffer size change asynchronously, and reconfigure() read the size
straight back - getting the old one, sizing the ring from it, and telling the host a latency to
match. device_set_buffer_frames() now polls the read-back until it agrees, up to 200 ms, and its
result is finally used: a false is a device that had the size asked of it, took the call and never
changed, which is what genuine contention looks like from this side.

WHICH MEANS THE 45 ms MAY NEVER HAVE BEEN CONTENTION AT ALL. The earlier diagnosis - "something else
already has this device open" - fitted the evidence and was reinforced by the author's own test runs
holding the KRONOS at the time. It may simply have been this race, on a device slow to reconfigure.
Both are now handled and the log tells them apart, which is the useful outcome; but the confident
explanation was reached before the alternative had been ruled out, and the alternative was simpler.

A DEVICE THAT NEVER CHANGED HAS NOTHING TO HAND BACK. restoreDevice/restoreFrames were recorded
before the set, so a set that did not take would have had close_capture_locked() "restore" a size the
device was already at - harmless, but it would have been a second write to a device someone else
owns. Cleared when the set is refused.

2026-09-08 (11)  TWO INSTANCES DO INTERFERE - THROUGH THE MIDI DESTINATION TABLE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT: "Might be related to attempting to run Kronos and Rytm in the same project? They may be
interfering somehow?" They were, though not in the way that produced the 512 frame buffer.

THE DESTINATION LIST IS PROCESS-GLOBAL AND WAS REBUILT IN PLACE. gbMidi.c holds one gDest/gName/
gCount for every GenBridge in the host - a host loads all its plug-ins into one process - and
refresh() set gCount = 0 and then spent milliseconds inside CoreMIDI enumerating. For that entire
window every send in the process saw "index >= gCount" and returned false. Notes silently dropped,
on EVERY instance, once a second for as long as any panel was open, because a repaint is what calls
refresh(). Two instances is two panels and two audio threads, which is why it showed up as the two
interfering.

Built into a shadow now and copied in with the COUNT PUBLISHED LAST under a release, so a reader
indexing below the count it loaded sees entries written before it. Rebuilds are serialised against
each other by a mutex that no send ever takes - two editors repainting is two threads in there. A
slot can still name a different device after a rebuild, which is exactly why destinations are saved
and restored by NAME rather than by index.

WHAT IT DOES NOT EXPLAIN is the KRONOS at 512 while the panel said 64. Buffer sizes are per device;
close_capture_locked() hands a device back as it found it when an instance switches away; and devlat
660 is a KRONOS at 512 specifically, where the Rytm at 512 reports 512 for want of a converter
offset of its own. A Rytm instance cannot hold the KRONOS. Something on the KRONOS did, and the log
now names it when that something is another GenBridge.

TWO SEPARATE FAULTS, ONE HYPOTHESIS, and it was right about the first. Worth remembering that
"instances interfering" is a question about SHARED STATICS, and this file has several more of them -
gClient, gPort and gReady are all one per process. Those are written once and never rebuilt, which
is why they have been safe.

2026-09-08 (10)  THE PANEL SAID 64 AND THE DEVICE WAS RUNNING AT 512
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT gave the breakdown behind a 45 ms report - ring 1440, device 660, filter 32, measured 540 - and
then: "...and I'm using 64!"

BOTH OF THE FIRST TWO NUMBERS SAY 512, INDEPENDENTLY. 660 is a KRONOS at a 512 frame buffer (512
plus 148 of its own converter and safety offset) and 1440 is 1.25 * (512 callback + 512 device + 128
taps). The plug-in read the real size back from the device and sized everything from it correctly.
The PANEL showed the request.

REPRODUCED, AND IT IS INTERMITTENT. Asking the KRONOS for 64 in one run gave 512 - ring 1440, devlat
660, reported 2132, CT's numbers to the frame - and in the next gave 64, ring 880, devlat 212,
reported 1124. The difference is whether something else already had the device open: a CoreAudio
buffer size belongs to whoever opened it first, and a later request is accepted and ignored. There
were [Live nnnnn] lines in the shared log at the time, so in the failing run Ableton had it.

The clamp against the device's own range did NOT fire, which is what tells the two causes apart: 64
is inside what the KRONOS says it supports, so this is not a driver minimum, it is contention. The
log now says which, having asked for the range specifically to be able to.

AND IF THE OTHER HOLDER IS ANOTHER GenBridge, IT IS NAMED. A host loads every plug-in into one
process, so the status block an instance publishes into is the same array every other GenBridge in
the session publishes into - which makes "something else has it open" answerable rather than a
shrug. Two instances pointed at one device is an ordinary thing to end up with, and the second one
silently inherits the first one's buffer. The log now distinguishes three cases: another GenBridge
in this host, something outside it, and a size the driver simply cannot do.

Note that a Rytm instance at 512 does NOT explain a KRONOS at 512 - the sizes are per device, and
close_capture_locked() hands a device back as it found it when an instance switches away from it.
devlat 660 is a KRONOS at 512 specifically; the Rytm at 512 reports 512, having no converter offset
of its own. So whatever held it was on the KRONOS.

The panel's Buffer row now reads "64 samples  (device gave 512)" when the two differ. The arithmetic
was never wrong - what was missing was anyone being told, and a device silently running eight times
the requested buffer is most of a plug-in's reported latency. It also explains why the ring looked
inexplicably large against the setting on screen through the previous three exchanges: the setting
on screen was fiction.

2026-09-08 (9)  43.5 ms IS THE RING, AND THE RING IS THE PRICE OF NOT GLITCHING
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The reported latency now logs its own breakdown every time it changes, which settled a question that
two rounds of argument could not:

    latency 2045 smp (42.6 ms) = pipeline 2045 (setpoint would say 1984:
                                 ring 1440 + device 512 + filter 32) + measured 0 (0.0 ms)

Not the measurement, and not the change to reporting a live figure - the pipeline and the setpoint
estimate agree to within 61 frames. It is the RING, and the ring is 1440 frames because that is what
one audio callback plus a device buffer plus the resampler's taps comes to, with 25 % on top.

THIS IS THE BILL FOR 2026-09-08 (3). Sizing the ring for a single process() call gave 400 frames and
underran 45 times in two seconds; sizing it for a whole callback stopped that dead and costs exactly
the difference. The two are the same decision seen from either end, and there is no third option
where the ring covers a 512-frame demand while holding 400 frames.

    setpoint = 1.25 * (callback frames + device buffer + 2 * RESAMPLER_TAPS)

    Live   device      ring    total (before the synth's own round trip)
     128       64       400      496 smp   10.3 ms
     256       64       560      656 smp   13.7 ms
     512       64       880      976 smp   20.3 ms
    1024       64      1520     1616 smp   33.7 ms
     512      256      1120     1408 smp   29.3 ms
    1024      256      1760     2048 smp   42.7 ms

So 43.5 ms names its own configuration: a 1024 frame host buffer, or a 512 with a device buffer well
above 64. The levers are the host's buffer first and GenBridge's device buffer second, and they are
both on the panel.

CT'S OWN BREAKDOWN, WHICH NAMES THE CONFIGURATION EXACTLY: ring 1440, device 660, filter 32,
measured 540. Both of the first two say the same thing independently - 660 is a KRONOS at a 512
frame device buffer (512 plus 148 of its own converter and safety offset), and 1440 is
1.25 * (512 callback + 512 device + 128 taps). The device buffer is in there TWICE, as its own term
and again inside the ring's floor, which is why it is the biggest single lever:

  GB buffer  512  Live  512   ring 1440 + device 660 + filter 32 = 2132 smp   44.4 ms
  GB buffer   64  Live  512   ring  880 + device 212 + filter 32 = 1124 smp   23.4 ms
  GB buffer   64  Live  256   ring  560 + device 212 + filter 32 =  804 smp   16.8 ms
  GB buffer   64  Live  128   ring  400 + device 212 + filter 32 =  644 smp   13.4 ms

Half of it goes for one control. The 148 frames inside the device term are the KRONOS's own and
cannot be argued with. Worth saying that a 64 frame device buffer was UNUSABLE before the burst fix
in 2026-09-08 (3) - it underran 45 times in two seconds - so anyone who set 512 to stop the
glitching can now put it back.

GB_AUTO_MARGIN IS 1.25 AND HAS NEVER BEEN JUSTIFIED BY MEASUREMENT. At 1024/64 that is 304 frames -
6.3 ms of pure headroom on top of a floor that is already the worst case. Worth an experiment: drop
it toward 1.05 and watch the underrun counter across a session. There is also a manual setpoint in
the saved settings (targetMs) which is honoured with a warning if it is below the floor, but nothing
on the panel sets it.

2026-09-08 (8)  41 ms REPORTED - A LIVE FIGURE NEEDS BOUNDS A CONSTANT DID NOT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT, straight after the change above: "Ableton now has the plugin as have 41ms latency! that's very
wrong!" - against roughly 20 ms before it. Reported around 2100 samples on the panel.

THE CHANGE THAT CAUSED IT WAS RIGHT AND INCOMPLETE. Reporting a measured pipeline instead of the
ring's setpoint removes a 4-9 ms over-compensation, but a measured figure can be wrong in ways a
constant cannot: the occupancy is read live, and the frames-so-far-this-callback depend on a cycle
boundary being detected. A missed boundary accumulates a "callback" of arbitrary length; a ring just
primed or snapped reads full. Either lands on a host as tens of milliseconds.

BOUNDED BOTH WAYS NOW. burstBefore is clamped to one callback - nothing can have handed over more
than that before the current call, by definition - and the smoothed pipeline is clamped to the
setpoint's own estimate plus or minus one callback and a device buffer. The drift loop holds the
ring near its setpoint and the burst explains the rest, so anything outside that band is a fault
rather than a measurement. The correction survives; the failure mode does not.

AND THE RING WAS SEEN BACKING UP, which may be the real story underneath it: fill climbing 1318 ->
1467 -> 1771 -> 1898 -> 2003 against a setpoint of 1440, drift wandering. If the ring genuinely sits
that far above its setpoint then the honest delay IS larger, the plug-in was right to say so, and
the thing to fix is the ring rather than the reporting. Not yet chased.

ONE LOG FILE, EVERY PROCESS - and it caught me exactly as its own comment warns. Half the lines read
while diagnosing this were "[Live nnnnn]", from CT's session on the same machine, interleaved with
"[vst3check nnnnn]" from the rig. Filter by the process name before drawing any conclusion.

A HOST KEEPS THE COPY IT LOADED. Ableton was running a build from before the guard, so the 41 ms on
screen was not the code being reasoned about. do-vst3 prints this on every run and it is still worth
saying out loud when a report and a measurement disagree.

2026-09-08 (7)  THE HOST WAS TOLD A LATENCY THE PIPELINE DID NOT HAVE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT: the measurements now agree between rigs, "but those measurements are not resulting in recordings
with the audio events landing on the beat", 5 ms by hand being right on a KRONOS that measures 11 -
and the reasonable suspicion that Ableton was adding compensation of its own. It was not. The two
figures Live reports (8.42 ms in, 5.92 ms out at a 256 buffer) belong to the QU-24, which is Live's
own device and nowhere near this path.

THE GAP WAS OURS, AND IT IS VISIBLE NOW THAT BOTH NUMBERS ARE PUBLISHED:

    told 2679   actual 2221-2506      gap 173-458 frames, 3.6 - 9.5 ms
    told 2672   actual 2249-2303      gap ~380 frames,    8 ms

The reported figure was built from the ring's SETPOINT and the real delay is the ring's actual
occupancy - and on a bursty host the ring sits BELOW its setpoint. A host compensating by 9 ms for a
5 ms delay records everything 4 ms early, whatever the measurement of the synth says. No amount of
work on the measurement could have fixed it, which is why three rounds of that did not.

REPORTED FROM A SMOOTHED MEASUREMENT NOW, not from the setpoint. A two-second average, so it follows
the ring without chasing its sawtooth, and a 64-frame deadband before the host is told, because
every telling costs a full delay compensation pass and the figure now moves. After:

    told 2306   actual 2286-2300      gap 6-20 frames
    told 2297   actual 2321-2370      gap 24-73 frames

The setpoint remains the estimate used before a block has run, which is the only moment there is
nothing measured to report.

TWO GUARDS THE LIVE FIGURE NEEDED THAT THE CONSTANT ONE DID NOT:

  "How long ago the last capture callback landed" is 0 before the first one, and the gap from 0 is
  the machine's uptime. It put 151 ms on the panel. Clamped at four device periods - beyond that the
  device has gone quiet and the term is not a measurement.

  The retune checks failed honestly once the figure went live: vst3check's retune loop still paced
  itself with usleep(2666), which runs slower than 48 kHz, so the device outran it and the ring
  really did back up to 147 ms. The plug-in was right and the rig was wrong - the third time in this
  session, and the second time in that same file.

AND ONE CHECK WAS TESTING THE WRONG THING. "A reopen keeps the tuned setpoint" demanded the reported
latency be EQUAL across a reactivation; it now differs by a handful of samples because it is a
measurement. What the check exists to catch is the retune being UNDONE, which is several hundred
samples, so it has a tolerance and prints how far it moved.

2026-09-08 (6)  REFERENCE MEASUREMENTS ON THIS RIG - AND WHAT IS NOT IN THEM
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT reported 21 ms for an Analog Rytm where 11 is right, and asked the good question: "Are the times
I'm getting being accumulated with some Ableton latency reports?"

NO, AND THE REASON IS WORTH STATING. The measurement is a CLOSED LOOP: the plug-in stamps a note
onto a CoreMIDI destination itself and listens on its own capture device. Nothing Live reports about
its own latency is in that path, and the host's output latency cancels because both ends of the trip
are anchored to the top of process() - see 2026-09-08 (1). What Live IS told is internal + measured,
and internal grows with the ring, which grows with Live's buffer; so a bigger Live buffer inflates
the REPORTED total without changing the measured hardware share.

MEASURED HERE, same machine, same hardware, through vst3check --play with a four-block callback:

  Analog Rytm, kick on C-2 (note 0), device buffer default   12.5 - 13.5 ms, 0.25 ms across 3 runs
  Analog Rytm, same, device buffer 64                        12.9 - 13.9 ms
  Elektron Analog Keys                                       12.5 - 13.6 ms, 0.23 ms across 3 runs
  KRONOS, dry preset                                          9.1 -  9.4 ms, 0.33 ms across 3 runs

All five trips of a run now agree to within about a millisecond, which is the synth's own jitter.
The Rytm reports devlat 64 at a 64-frame buffer - the buffer and nothing else, no converter or
safety offset at all - so `buffered` comes out 0 for it.

THE RYTM MEASURES 13 ms HERE AND 21 ms IN CT'S SESSION, on the same box. That is an eight
millisecond difference the algorithm cannot produce on its own: the round trip is invariant to the
ring's size (proved by the failed experiment in the entry above, and confirmed by the buffer-64 run
moving it by 1 ms, not 8). So the difference is in what the plug-in is pointed at over there - which
device, which input pair, whether Live holds the same device open - and the log line now carries
everything needed to tell: every trip individually, plus "our share N (ring F of S)". A share much
smaller than the 820 measured here is the whole story.

EVERY TRIP IS LOGGED NOW, not just the average and the range. Five readings clustered with one wild
outlier and five spread evenly produce the same summary and mean quite different things.

2026-09-08 (5)  REVERB ON THE PRESET MEASURED AS 6 ms OF SYNTH
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT, recording through both: the Analog Rytm lined up perfectly on the measured figure, the KRONOS
came out about 5 ms early on a kick drum - "both were measuring around 11 ms" - and setting the
KRONOS trim to 5 ms by hand made it correct. Then: "Ah yeah, there's reverb on this preset."

THE FLOOR WAS A PEAK HELD OVER THE WHOLE WINDOW, and the threshold is eight times whatever it says.
A preset with reverb on it is still decaying through that window, so the figure was a measurement of
the tail rather than of the floor. Too high a threshold does not fail loudly - it fires LATE into
the attack, which reads as a slower synth, which the host then over-compensates for, and the take
records EARLY. A dry kick on a Rytm crosses immediately and measures true; the same kick through a
reverbed KRONOS patch measures the reverb's threshold instead.

The hold now restarts two thirds of the way through the window, leaving the last third - the part
nearest the note, and the quietest part of any decay - as the answer. On this rig it moved the
KRONOS from 10.0-10.3 ms to 9.1-9.4 ms; on a preset with a long tail it will move it further.

IT STILL CANNOT SEPARATE THE SYNTH FROM ITS PATCH, and no threshold detector can: a pad crosses
later than a piano because it IS later. Measure on the driest, most percussive preset the device
has, and keep the trim for the rest.

FOUR TRIPS OUT OF FIVE WERE SILENTLY NOT HAPPENING. The settle between trips waited a fixed 0.35 s,
which is nowhere near enough for a note with a tail to decay - so the next floor was taken over the
ringing note, the threshold came out too high for the next note to cross, and that trip timed out.
A timeout ends the run, so every "average of five" was resting on one reading. The settle now ends
when the input has actually gone quiet, with 0.35 s as a minimum and 2.5 s as a ceiling. Trips used
went from 1 of 5 to 2-3 of 5 on a reverbed preset, and should be 5 of 5 on a dry one.

AN EXPERIMENT THAT FAILED, KEPT BECAUSE IT LOOKED SO RIGHT. The frames already handed over inside a
callback were added to the share the measurement nets off, on the reasoning that a callback of four
128-frame blocks drains the ring in one go so the fill at the fourth call is 384 frames below the
fill at the first. True, and irrelevant: if the onset sits at position p in the ring, the call that
reads it finds it at cross = p minus the frames already read, and that call's fill is lower by
exactly the same amount. The two cancel, and the round trip is invariant to which call detects it.
Adding the term uncancelled them and took a measurement that had settled to 0.2 ms across runs back
to a 7.3 ms spread. Reverted.

The term DOES belong in a different quantity - how far behind the audio is where the host finally
places it - and that is now published beside the reported figure as "actual", so the two can be
compared on a real rig instead of argued about. told 2241 / actual 2191-2251 here, which is the
agreement that was wanted; whether it holds on CT's rig is the open question behind the 5 ms.

THE MONOTONIC MODEL NEEDED A WAY BACK. It advances by the host's nominal frame count while the clock
advances at the device's real rate, so it creeps ahead by a few ppm for as long as the session runs
- into the ceiling, and a ceiling trip resets to the clock, which is the one backwards step the
monotonic rule exists to prevent. When it is further ahead than a callback can account for, each
block now advances by a shade less than its own length: two per cent, 53 microseconds at 128 frames,
closing a whole callback of excess inside half a second, and never negative.

2026-09-08 (4)  LIVE KEYBOARD STOPPED PASSING THROUGH - FIXED, BY ONE OF TWO
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT: "MIDI from a keyboard source on the Ableton track is no longer being passed through the plugin",
and then the detail that makes it a real clue: "It sends to the kronos and returns, when MIDI is
present on a track's loop." Clip MIDI works; live playing does not.

NOTHING IN forward_events() CAN TELL THE TWO APART, so either the host is not delivering the live
events, or something downstream of the send is losing them. That is now visible rather than a matter
of opinion: the panel's telemetry has a "notes" row showing events taken from the host and events
that reached a destination. A still 0 on the left is Live's end; in without out is ours.

TWO REAL DEFECTS FOUND WHILE LOOKING, NEITHER PROVEN TO BE THIS ONE:

  THE BLOCK MODEL HAD NO HARD BOUND. Replacing the old quarter-second cap with "re-anchor at every
  cycle boundary" (2026-09-08 (3)) left the ceiling to a heuristic. A host rendering faster than
  realtime hands over call after call with no gap, every one reads as a continuation, and the model
  walks into the future without limit - MIDI stamped from it is not late, it is GONE, held by
  CoreMIDI until a time that may be minutes away. Nothing sounds and everything else works, which is
  exactly the shape of the report. There is a ceiling again, and it is generous on purpose.

  THE MODEL IS MONOTONIC NOW, and that is the more interesting of the two. Re-anchoring to the clock
  at every callback boundary looks obviously right - the clock is the truth - and it can step the
  stamps BACKWARDS: a callback arriving early gets a first stamp before the previous burst's last
  one. CoreMIDI delivers in timestamp order, so a note-off can overtake its note-on. Notes stick,
  later ones queue behind them, and a quantised clip whose events are far apart plays perfectly.
  The rule is now: follow the frames, never go backwards, and if that has drifted implausibly far
  from the clock, admit it and start again.

THE CEILING ITSELF INVERTED THE STREAM ON ITS FIRST ATTEMPT, which is worth recording because it is
the same class of mistake twice in one sitting. Set at twice the measured callback, it came out at
256 frames while the host was handing over bursts of 512 - so it tripped on every burst, and a trip
IS a backwards step. observedMaxFrames is also only collected while a device is running, and MIDI
flows whether one is or not, so it read 0 and fell back to the declared per-call maximum. Eight
declared blocks, minimum 4096 frames, and a host outside that is pathological.

WHAT THE NEW TEST DOES AND DOES NOT PROVE. vst3check now plays 24 notes in six four-block bursts
with the boundary jittered 6 ms / 15.3 ms around a true 10.67 ms cycle, and checks every one comes
back, in order, with non-decreasing stamps. It passes with the fix and it also passes with the old
rule - so it is a guard on the property, NOT evidence that the property was what CT hit. The reason
is worth knowing for anyone extending it: the sink is a virtual destination in the same process, and
CoreMIDI hands those to the read proc as they are sent rather than holding them to their timestamps.
Proving a reordering out of a real port needs real hardware on the other end.

RESOLVED BY THE PAIR OF THEM - CT, same day: "MIDI notes from my keyboard now coming through." Both
fixes shipped in one build, so which of the two it was is not established and now cannot be without
deliberately putting one back. The bound and the monotonic rule are each correct on their own terms,
so neither is worth un-fixing to find out; what is worth keeping is that BOTH failure modes end in
the same silent symptom, and that a clip kept playing through both of them.

The "notes in/out" row stays. It cost nothing and it is the row that would have answered this in one
glance instead of an afternoon.

2026-09-08 (3)  THE GLITCH WAS THE RING, NOT THE MIDI - A CALLBACK'S DEMAND IS NOT A BLOCK
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT: "Latency measurement still giving me anything from 1ms to 10ms. I can also still hear the
glitch." Then the settings, which is what made it findable: KRONOS _ USB _ L&R, 48000, buffer 64,
stereo, MIDI out KRONOS SOUND, channel 1.

REPRODUCED OUTSIDE ABLETON, on the same hardware, with vst3check --play --buffer 64 --burst 4:

    [ring] fill  18.0 of 400.0   drift -0.0 ppm   under 45  resync 44

Forty-five underruns in two seconds, one audible click each, and the drift loop never even started
because it was being resynced faster than it could correct.

THE RING WAS SIZED FOR ONE CALL AND DRAINED BY A WHOLE CALLBACK. Ableton declares 512 and calls with
128, four times back to back. observe_block() read "the largest block actually seen" as 128 and the
retune shrank the setpoint to suit - 400 frames against a callback that takes 512. Every cycle ran
it dry. A 512-frame device buffer had hidden it for months: the setpoint then came out at 960 by
accident, which is more than one callback, so it only ever bit at a small buffer.

The declared maximum was RIGHT all along. observe_burst() now adds up the frames handed over inside
one callback and the retune sizes from that, so under Ableton it confirms the declaration instead of
undercutting it, and on a host that genuinely uses less it still reclaims the difference. Same
settings after the fix: **0 underruns, 0 resyncs**.

THREE WRONG TURNS ON THE WAY, all worth keeping:

  - The cycle boundary cannot be "the block model fell behind real time". Under a host that paces
    evenly the clock never quite catches up, so one "cycle" ran 408 blocks long and the plug-in
    asked for a 65520 frame ring and reported 1.4 seconds of latency. It is the GAP between calls:
    two calls belong to one callback if the second arrives before half of the first could have
    played. Microseconds against milliseconds - the threshold is not delicate.
  - That same rule now bounds the MIDI timeline, which had the same flaw and a quarter-second cap
    papering over it. Within a callback the model is the truth; across callbacks the clock is.
  - The burst must only be measured while a device is RUNNING. Blocks driven before one opens say
    nothing about what the ring will cover, and an unpaced burst of them left a fictitious cycle
    length that settled the retune for the rest of the session.

MEASUREMENT: 1-10 ms BECAME 0.2 ms, and the last of it was mine. Netting off the live ring fill
(2026-09-08 (2)) was half a fix: occupancy is not an age. The device writes a whole buffer at a time,
so the fill jumps up at each capture callback and falls as the host drains it, while the audio in
the ring ages at the same rate - the two move in ANTI-PHASE and their sum is constant. Take the fill
alone and what is left is a sawtooth of one whole device buffer.

latency_frames_measured() takes two numbers: how long ago the last capture callback landed, and how
many frames sit in front of it. deviceLatency already contains the device's buffer, so that term is
subtracted - "how long ago" measures it directly and counting it twice put a whole buffer back on.
Both are read at the ONSET block; reading the write timestamp two blocks later at confirmation time
collapses the first term to zero and the share comes out a buffer short. It read as an 18 ms synth.

Measured on the KRONOS, three consecutive runs: 9.73, 9.94, 9.73 ms - and the ring fill differed by
240 frames (5 ms) between them, which is exactly the error that is no longer in the answer.

FIVE ROUND TRIPS, TRIMMED. One note is not a measurement of anything repeatable: USB transit, the
synth's scheduler and its envelope all move the onset. Measure plays five, drops the highest and
lowest, averages the middle three - and the panel prints the RANGE beside the figure, because an
average with no range beside it cannot be told from one lucky shot. On the KRONOS: "9.7 ms (3 trips,
9.0 - 10.2)". A trip that ran over an underrun or a resync simply does not vote, which replaces the
old rule of throwing away the whole run - on a rig that resyncs at all, that rule made a measurement
impossible, and the resync was often caused by the act of measuring.

THE ACT OF MEASURING WAS ITSELF A GLITCH. Pressing Measure did a log_line() - which opens and closes
the file - and 32 MIDISend calls, one note-off and one All Notes Off on each of 16 channels, all
inside one process() call. Half a millisecond of a 2.7 ms block at the exact moment the ring must
not be starved. Both are the worker's job now.

THE TEST NOTE IS SETTABLE, C-2 to G8, saved with the project and shown on the Measure row. Middle C
is a fine default for a keyboard and useless on a drum machine - an Analog Rytm has nothing there at
all and wants the lowest note there is. Note 0 is named C-2, the convention where middle C is C3,
because that is what the hardware prints on its own screen.

THE HARNESS ACCUSED THE PLUG-IN THREE TIMES, and this is the recurring lesson (see also
MidiSyncTool's findings 2026-09-02, and the usleep note in the shared memory):

  - usleep(2666) per block drifts slow, so the device outran the harness and the plug-in resynced.
    Paced against an absolute deadline with mach_wait_until() instead.
  - usleep(300000) between measurement runs is a host that stops calling process() for 300 ms - 14400
    frames into a 7680 frame ring. It overflowed, and every run was correctly discarded for
    happening over a resync. Seven of eight runs lost, not one of them the plug-in's fault.
  - An unasked-for buffer parameter sent as 0.0 is not "leave it alone", it is a real slot: every
    run_blocks() call changed the device buffer and reopened the device.

And one that was purely mine: an edit meant to replace the pause after a measurement deleted the
2000 blocks that DROVE it, so the run got 120 blocks - a third of the settle phase. The measurement
looked hung for an hour. Publishing the phase and the frame counter to the status block found it in
one run; that telemetry stayed, and the panel can now say which trip is in flight.

2026-09-08 (2)  THE STAMP WAS RIGHT AND THE CLOCK WAS WRONG - A HOST'S CALLBACK IS NOT ONE BLOCK
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT, after the round above landed: "Looks better taking the host buffering into account. Measuring
our latency via the latency button does now seem variable though. The sound I hear is glitchy."

Both symptoms, one cause, and it was introduced by the fix above.

A HOST IS ENTITLED TO HAND OVER SEVERAL BLOCKS PER AUDIO CALLBACK, AND THIS ONE DOES. Ableton
declares 512 and calls with 128 - the retune code has said so for weeks - which is FOUR process()
calls computed back to back inside one 512-frame cycle, microseconds apart. Reading
AudioGetCurrentHostTime() at the top of each and calling it the block's start time gives all four
nearly the same answer. So:

  - blocks two, three and four were stamped up to 384 frames early; and
  - their events INTERLEAVED with the previous block's. A note at offset 0 of the second call is
    truly 128 frames after a note at offset 127 of the first, but came out stamped 127 frames
    BEFORE it. CoreMIDI delivers in timestamp order, so that is a note-off overtaking its note-on.

Measured in vst3check: two process() calls with no pause between them, a note at offset 0 in each,
came out 0.005 ms apart where they belong 2.667 ms apart. That is the glitch, and it is now a check.

THE FRAMES THEMSELVES CARRY THE PACING. block_host_time() keeps one number - the wall time at which
the frames handed over so far run out - and uses it unless real time has already passed it, which is
what a new device cycle and a late callback both look like. Nothing has to classify cycles or
measure a buffer. MidiSyncTool reached the same place from the other end (its findings 2026-09-02:
Live splits a buffer at a loop wrap into 500 frames and then 12); its version has to identify the
cycle because it needs the cycle's length for telemetry, and this one does not. The cap - a quarter
of a second - is for an offline bounce, which hands over blocks faster than realtime and would
otherwise walk the model into next week.

EVERYTHING THAT SENDS IS NOW ON THAT ONE CLOCK, and that is not tidiness. Half a stream stamped into
the future and half sent immediately is a stream that arrives OUT OF ORDER: an "immediate" byte
overtakes every note still waiting for its offset. So send_controller() (CCs, pitch bend, channel
pressure), the measurement's own note and note-off, and the All Notes Off that opens a measurement
all take a timestamp now. Ten sends, no exceptions - grep for gb_midi_send( in gbVst3.cpp and there
should be none.

AND THE MEASUREMENT STOPPED COUNTING BLOCKS. Elapsed frames assume blocks arrive evenly spaced, and
in a burst they do not - they arrive together and then nothing for the rest of the cycle. The answer
therefore depended on WHICH call of the callback the onset was detected in: 0, 128, 256 or 384
frames of pure artefact at a 512-frame cycle, up to 8 ms of jump between two runs measuring the same
unchanged synth. It is timed on the clock at both ends now:

  - the note leaves at nextBlockHostTime, the one instant here guaranteed to be in the FUTURE, so
    CoreMIDI holds it and the moment it left is a number this code knows rather than hopes for;
  - the arrival is timed against blockActualHostTime, the RAW clock rather than the model, because
    the ring holds only what physically arrived by that instant.

TWO CLOCKS, DELIBERATELY, and this is the part to remember: outgoing MIDI is stamped on the MODEL,
because that is where a note belongs musically; anything measured about the audio coming back uses
the RAW clock, because that is when it physically got here. Inside a burst they differ by up to a
whole cycle and swapping them silently reintroduces exactly this bug.

The ring term is netted off at the occupancy the onset ACTUALLY came through rather than the
setpoint it is meant to sit at - a burst drains the ring, so the fill at the fourth call is a cycle
below the fill at the first. The setpoint remains what the HOST is told, because that is the
long-run figure. The measurement log now carries "our share N (ring F of S)" so a run that disagrees
with its neighbours can be seen to disagree there first.

WHAT IS LEFT IS THE SYNTH, and no amount of timing precision touches it: a threshold crossing cannot
tell a slow attack from a late note, so a pad measures later than a piano and a patch whose attack
sits near the threshold will still scatter. That is what the manual trim is for, and it now has a
coarse pair beside the fine one.

FINE AND COARSE ON THE OFFSET ROW, the arrangement MidiSyncTool settled on: [<<] [<] reading [>] [>>],
outermost coarse (1 ms) and innermost fine (0.1 ms), so distance from the reading reads as size of
change, and the result snapped to the fine grid so a coarse click on a measured 11.83 ms does not
carry the .03 for ever. draw_button() paints a box 2 px larger on each side than the rect it is
given, so the panel's usual 6 px spacing put the coarse and fine boxes touching - one four-glyph
blob. The gap has to clear the padding on BOTH neighbours before any of it is visible.

2026-09-08  RECORDED PARTS CREPT EARLIER AS THE HOST BUFFER GREW - AND IT WAS NOT THE HOST'S LATENCY
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CT: "if I use the measured compensation and set host buffer to larger values, I can see events
recorded based on our instrument getting much earlier", with the suggestion that the host's own
latency needs to go into the compensation the way MidiSyncTool takes it into account.

IT DOES NOT, AND THE REASON IS WORTH KEEPING. The host's output latency H - the gap between a block
being COMPUTED and that block being HEARD - is real and is unknown to us. But both ends of this
plug-in's round trip are anchored to the same instant: forward_events() sends at the top of
process(), and the fill the ring is read at is measured at the top of process(). A note in block B
comes back in the output at t_B + D + fill whatever H is, so H cancels in the difference and has no
place in getLatencySamples(). MidiSyncTool needs it because nothing comes back there: a tick has to
land at a musical moment as the LISTENER hears it, with only one end of the journey to work from
(findings 2026-09-02, "ProcessContext.systemTime IS ALWAYS ZERO").

WHAT WAS ACTUALLY WRONG WAS TWO HALF-BUFFER ERRORS THAT HAPPENED TO CANCEL AT ONE BUFFER SIZE.

  1. forward_events() never read event.sampleOffset. A host hands over a block with an offset per
     event; every note was fired the moment process() was entered, so a note at offset o reached
     the hardware o frames before its musical time. 0 to a whole buffer, half of one on average,
     and ALWAYS EARLY. 2.7 ms at 128 frames, up to 42.7 ms at 2048.

  2. run_measurement() credited the onset to measureFrames - the elapsed at the START of the block
     it was detected in - discarding however far into that block the sound began. Same range, same
     mean, opposite sign: the stored hardware share came out SHORT by half a buffer, which pushes a
     recording late.

So the recorded error is (measurement's i) - (the note's o): about zero at the buffer the
measurement was taken at, and about (N_measure - N_playback) / 2 frames EARLY at any other. Measure
at 128 and play at 1024 and that is 9 ms; at 2048, 20 ms. Both terms scale with the buffer, which is
exactly why it read as a missing host term.

THE FIX IS THE ONE MidiSyncTool ALREADY HAD, for a different reason. ms_midi_send_at() stamps a
packet with a MIDITimeStamp instead of the 0 that synthlib_midi_send_to() hardcodes; gb_midi_send_at()
is the same thing, and every event now goes out at blockHostTime + sampleOffset/rate. CoreMIDI holds
it until then, and a stamp already past is delivered immediately - so a late callback degrades to
today's behaviour rather than bunching. AudioGetCurrentHostTime() is read ONCE at the top of
process(), which is the instant the offsets are measured from.

IT COSTS NO LATENCY, and that is worth stating because MS_LOOKAHEAD_MS looks like a precedent for
adding some. Offsets inside a block are in the future when process() runs at the start of its
period, so no lead is needed to reach them; nothing is scheduled beyond the block that owns it.

The measurement note now goes out through the same stamped path at blockHostTime, so the clock and
the note start at the same instant, and the onset is refined to the first SAMPLE over the threshold
by one extra pass over the block that crossed. That makes the stored hardware share independent of
the buffer it was measured at, which was always the intent of subtracting internal_latency().

The packet list moved onto the stack while it was there. SynthLib's send builds into one shared
static buffer behind a mutex, so the old path took a lock per note on the audio thread.

IT HAS A REGRESSION TEST, and it needs no hardware. vst3check's virtual MIDI sink now records each
packet's TIMESTAMP as well as its bytes, and sends two note-ons in ONE block at offsets 0 and 127:
they must come back 2.646 ms apart (127 frames at 48 kHz), to a quarter of a millisecond. Run
against the old build it does not merely miss the figure - CoreMIDI COALESCES two identically
stamped packets into one, so the packet count alone gives it away. Nothing about the pace of the
test can influence the answer, because what is compared is the two stamps the plug-in itself chose.

tools/do-vst3host did not link CoreMIDI, so vst3check had not built since the sink was added; fixed
in passing.

CONTROLLERS, BEND AND AFTERTOUCH went the same way in the round below - see 2026-09-08 (2). They
arrive as parameter changes through IMidiMapping, and an unstamped one does not merely land in the
wrong place, it OVERTAKES the notes.



2026-09-02  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW AGAINST JUCE - WHAT IT DOES THAT WE DO NOT
------------------------------------------------------------
Read for MECHANISM only. JUCE 8 is AGPLv3 (see the note in G2-Edit's vst3/plugin-gui-notes.md), so
nothing may be copied into this GPLv3 project - ideas are not copyrightable, expression is.

ALREADY COVERED, checked rather than assumed:
  - ParameterInfo::kIsList is set on every list parameter (device, rate, frames, mode, midi dest),
    so a host's own generic panel already renders them as menus rather than sliders.
  - IMidiMapping on the instrument, the two-class factory, OnlyRT, kInfiniteTail - all present.

GAP 1 - THE HOST IS NEVER TOLD THE DEVICE NAMES CHANGED. This is the real find.
  device_list_changed() (gbVst3.cpp:530) fires from a CoreAudio thread on hot-plug and does two
  things: drops OUR cached list and wakes the worker. It never tells the HOST. But the device
  parameter's displayed strings ARE the device names, and a host caches those - so plug an interface
  in or pull one out and the host's generic panel, and any automation lane showing value names, go on
  listing the devices that were there when the plug-in loaded.
  JUCE's answer is Vst::kParamTitlesChanged (juce_audio_plugin_client_VST3.cpp:1514): when a
  parameter's display strings change it re-reads them and calls restartComponent with that flag. We
  already call restartComponent for kLatencyChanged, so the machinery is in place - it is one more
  flag from the worker after a device-list change.

GAP 2 - NO BYPASS PARAMETER. JUCE always exposes one flagged kIsBypass; we expose none. For an Fx a
  host will bypass us its own way, so nothing is broken today, but a plug-in that declares its bypass
  lets the host hand the decision to the plug-in and keep it in automation. Cheap, and the VST3
  guidance asks for it.

CONSIDERED AND JUDGED NOT TO APPLY, so nobody re-raises them:
  - ScopedNoDenormals. JUCE sets FTZ/DAZ around every process() call and we set nothing. But the
    denormal hazard is IIR feedback decaying toward zero, and this plug-in's audio path is a 64-tap
    FIR resampler and a gain multiply - fed exact silence it produces exact zeros. The PI controller
    in drift.c works in ppm-scale doubles that never approach denormal range. Cheap insurance if ever
    wanted, but it is insurance against a hazard this DSP does not have.
  - JUCE's AudioIODeviceCombiner as a model for the bridge itself: it has no drift compensation at
    all (see reference note) and xruns on a fixed schedule. We are ahead of it there.

2026-09-02  THE SELECTOR IS THE MOST REUSABLE THING HERE - WHAT WOULD GO TO SYNTHLIB
------------------------------------------------------------
CT's call: adapt this into the siblings, and push whatever is generic down into SynthLib. NOT done in
this session - this is the survey so it does not have to be redone.

WHAT EACH SIBLING HAS TODAY
  G2-Edit    Audio Device and MIDI Input as menu FLYOUTS (appMenuBar.c:902 and :1035), built ad hoc
             from a CoreAudio/CoreMIDI enumeration. Works, but has no per-device memory, no channel
             limits, and no way to select nothing.
  SynthEdit  No device UI at all. The destination is a NAME in a layout file (midiPort) resolved by
             three fallbacks. That is precisely what made 2026-09-02's unpowered Thru box hard to
             place: nothing on screen said which port was in use or whether anything answered on it.
  EmuUtility Scan Devices, and the app locks onto whatever answers an identity broadcast. The
             wrong-destination bug fixed this morning was silent for exactly that reason.

GENERIC, AND THE STRONGEST CANDIDATES - in rough order of how cleanly they lift:
  1. poc/device.c/.h (18 functions). CoreAudio enumeration, name/UID, input and output channel
     counts, nominal rate and buffer get/set, the FOUR latency terms, hot-plug watching, and
     device_is_running_somewhere(). Nothing in it is GenBridge-specific; it is a CoreAudio device
     layer that happens to live in a bridge. This is the biggest single win and the easiest.
  2. The MIDI destination half of vst3/gbMidi.c/.h - enumeration, name lookup, slot-for-name.
     SynthLib already owns the SEND primitive (synthlibMidi.c), so this is the missing half of a file
     that already exists there, which is the neatest possible fit.
  3. The per-device remembered-settings table keyed by UID (tDeviceSettings and find/ensure_settings
     in gbVst3.cpp). Every one of the four apps wants "remember how this device was set up"; only
     this one has it.
  4. The selector ROW itself - label, full-width value, drop-down, with each row listing only what is
     reachable on the current device. Generic now that contextMenu.c is shared and scrolls, and it is
     the same three-or-four-row shape in every app.

WHAT SHOULD NOT MOVE
  The drift loop, the ring, the resampler and the setpoint arithmetic. They are what a BRIDGE is, and
  no sibling has a use for them.

WATCH OUT FOR: device.c currently returns tDeviceInfo with a fixed DEVICE_MAX of 64 and truncates
silently past it (its own todo item). Moving it to SynthLib is the moment to decide whether that cap
stays, because at that point four apps inherit it rather than one.


2026-09-02  RACE CONDITION REVIEW - SEVEN FIXED, TWO LEFT AS ASSUMPTIONS
------------------------------------------------------------
Method: enumerate every member of the processor, then for each one list the functions that touch it
and which thread each of those runs on. There are five: the host's audio thread (process, and
apply_parameter_changes which deliberately runs BEFORE the trylock so parameter changes are seen
during a device swap), the CoreAudio IO thread (capture_callback, which takes no lock and must not),
the plug-in's own worker, the host's main thread (setState/getState/setupProcessing/connect), and the
editor's draw timer.

FIXED:
 1. setState() rewrote the whole configuration with no lock. parse_state() clears and reassigns
    deviceSelector and savedDeviceName - both std::string, so a concurrent read by the worker is a
    possibly-freed pointer, not a stale value - plus the remembered[] and measured[] tables and the
    offset pair. reconfigure() reads deviceSelector and savedDeviceName BEFORE it takes configLock.
    Now locked, mirroring the getState() fix; the state->read() loop stays outside, because it calls
    back into the host.
 2. midiName was a member char buffer WRITTEN ON THE AUDIO THREAD (snprintf in the parameter pass),
    read by getState on the host thread and rewritten by parse_state. Deleted outright: the name is
    derivable from the midiDestination atomic wherever it is wanted (current_midi_name()), so the
    buffer being raced over did not need to exist.
 3. captureChannels - plain uint32_t written by the worker under the lock and read by BOTH the
    CoreAudio callback and the audio thread's pre-trylock pass. Now atomic.
 4. hardwareSamples - written by the worker, read by publish_latency_breakdown(), which is called
    both with the lock held and without it and so can take neither. Now atomic.
 5. statusSlot - assigned when the host connects the two ends, read by publish_status() on every
    audio block. Now atomic.
 6. setupProcessing() wrote hostRate, hostMaxFrames, observedMaxFrames and observedFrames with no
    lock. VST3 guarantees the AUDIO thread is stopped there - which is why observe_block() may touch
    the same fields - but it guarantees nothing about the plug-in's OWN worker, which reads all four
    under configLock. Now locked.
 7. measureUnderrunsAtStart / measureResyncsAtStart - written by start_measurement() on the audio
    thread, read by store_measurement() on the worker to decide whether a measurement was clean.
    Now atomic.

CHECKED AND NOT A RACE, so nobody re-fixes them:
  - measureState and the rest of the measure* machine are touched ONLY by the audio thread
    (start_measurement before the trylock, run_measurement after it). Inconsistent lock discipline,
    but one thread, so no race.
  - remembered[] and measured[]: every reader and writer now holds configLock, after fixes 1 above
    and the getState fix earlier in the day.

LEFT AS DOCUMENTED ASSUMPTIONS, both in the same place:
  - capture_callback() reads ring and widen with no lock while close_capture_locked() frees them.
    Correctness rests entirely on AudioDeviceStop() guaranteeing no IOProc is in flight when it
    returns. The ordering is right (device_close before any free), so this is an assumption rather
    than a defect - but it is the only thing standing between a device change and a use-after-free.
    Hardening it costs a callbackActive flag the closer spins on, or simply never freeing the ring
    and reallocating only on a size change.
  - start_measurement() reads ring.underflows unlocked, which is the same assumption in miniature.


2026-09-02  SCROLLING MENUS, AND WHY THE HOVER-EDGE FORM WAS CHOSEN
------------------------------------------------------------
Removing the stepper arrows put the whole burden of reachability on the drop-downs, so a menu that
could not show every item stopped being untidy and became a way to make a device unreachable. Before
this, clamp_menu_to_screen() only MOVED a menu up to fit; once it was taller than the window it
landed at the top and the surplus ran off the bottom, drawn nowhere and clickable never.

TWO STANDARD FORMS, and the choice between them was decided by what this code already has:

  - A DRAGGED SCROLLBAR is SynthLib's own idiom - render_list_scrollbar() and the
    list_scrollbar_mouse_down/drag/up helpers in utilsGraphics.h, used by fileBrowser.cpp and
    bankBrowser.cpp. Rejected because it needs mouse-UP delivered to the menu to end a drag, and no
    app routes that to contextMenu.c today. Adding it would have meant touching three apps' input
    plumbing for a menu feature.
  - HOVER-EDGE AUTO-SCROLL is what a macOS menu does when it outgrows the screen, and it needs
    nothing but the pointer position - which update_context_menu_hover() is already handed every
    frame by every app. Chosen.

WHAT WAS BUILT, in SynthLib/src/contextMenu.c so all three apps inherit it:
  - tMenuFrame gains visibleRows and scrollRow. A frame that fits has visibleRows == its total rows
    and never scrolls, so nothing changes for the menus G2-Edit and SynthEdit already open.
  - clamp_menu_to_screen() still MOVES the menu up first and only caps what still will not fit -
    sliding costs the user nothing, scrolling costs a gesture.
  - Hovering the top or bottom edge scrolls continuously (MENU_SCROLL_ROWS_PER_SEC), and CLICKING a
    strip pages by visibleRows-1 rather than choosing an item. The click half matters for a
    trackpad, where a tap reports a position and no motion.
  - A chevron marks each live strip, drawn over the first/last visible row - the macOS placement.
    Overdrawing loses nothing: a strip is only live while there is more in that direction, so at the
    end of the list the strip goes inactive and the row beneath it is clickable again.
  - context_menu_scroll() is exposed for an app that routes a scroll wheel. An app that never calls
    it still reaches every item by the edges.

A SECOND AND THIRD COPY OF THE GEOMETRY were found while doing it: render_menu_frame() recomputed
each cell rectangle inline, twice, rather than calling menu_item_rect(). Three copies would all have
had to learn about scrolling together or the menu would have drawn in one place and been clickable in
another - the same shape as the three normalized-to-slot mappings that once disagreed. Both passes
now call the one function.

NOTE FOR THE OTHER TWO PROJECTS: each has its own SynthLib checkout pinned to its own commit, so
G2-Edit and SynthEdit are untouched until their pins move. When they do, their menus get scrolling
for free and should be re-checked - particularly G2-Edit's, which is the only one using submenus.


2026-09-02  WHAT A DEVICE DROP-DOWN WOULD ACTUALLY COST
------------------------------------------------------------
gbDraw.c's own comment says steppers were chosen because "pulling it in means linking the popup,
menu-bar and click-region machinery for three settings". THAT IS NO LONGER TRUE and the comment
should be corrected by whoever does this work:

  - SynthLib/src/contextMenu.c includes NOTHING beyond synthlibDefs.h, geometry.h, utilsGraphics.h,
    synthlibHost.h, synthlibGlobals.h and utils.h - all of which gbDraw.c already includes. No popup
    coordinator, no menu bar, no click-region registry.
  - clickRegion.c and inputState.c are ALREADY in do-vst3's source list.
  - So the build cost is one line in do-vst3: SynthLib/src/contextMenu.c.

Two things the steppers never needed, and they are the real work:

  - synthlib_host_init() is never called anywhere in the plug-in. contextMenu.c calls
    synthlib_host_mouse_coord() rather than declaring its own extern, so the host struct
    (synthlibHost.h) has to be filled in. synthlib_request_redraw() is already stubbed in
    gbAppStubs.c, so only the mouse-coord half is missing.
  - gbView.m handles mouseDown: and mouseDragged: ONLY - there is no mouseMoved: and no
    NSTrackingArea, because a stepper never needed to know where the pointer was. Without one the
    menu still opens and its items are still clickable; they just never highlight under the cursor.
    Adding tracking is about ten lines and the existing 30 Hz timer already covers the repaint, but
    it touches the editor view, which is where every unresolved resize/occlusion caveat in
    to-test.txt already lives.

The menu itself is small: tMenuItem is {label, colour, action(int index), ...}, so a flat device list
needs no submenus, no flyouts and no hover-dwell timer. Labels come from gb_input_device_name(), and
the action records the chosen slot for gb_draw_click() to return as its request.

Worth doing for rate and frames too, for the reason the debounce already addresses from the other
end: a stepper walks THROUGH every value on the way to the one you want.

HOW LONG A LIST FITS, since a scrolling menu was raised as a possible need. contextMenu.c has NO
scrolling of any kind, and clamp_menu_to_screen() only MOVES a menu up to fit - when the menu is
taller than the canvas it lands at y=0 and the surplus runs off the bottom, undrawn and unreachable.
So the ceiling is real rather than merely ugly. The arithmetic:

  cell height  = STANDARD_TEXT_HEIGHT + 5*2 = 22
  usable       = GB_CANVAS_H 556 - SCROLLBAR_WIDTH ~= 541
  one column   = ~24 items
  two columns  = ~48 items

open_context_menu() already takes a `columns` argument, so multi-column costs nothing to use. Two is
the practical maximum at this canvas width: menu_cell_width() sizes to the widest label and a name
like "CalDigit Thunderbolt 3 Audio" runs about 180px at 12px text, so two columns is ~400 of the 520
available and three would not fit without capping cellWidth and truncating names. The editor is
resizable, so a taller window only helps.

BUT DO NOT SIZE THIS AGAINST THIS RIG. The first draft of this note reasoned from 7 input-capable
devices here and DEVICE_MAX's 64, and concluded multi-column was enough - CT's objection was that
nobody can predict how many inputs a studio has, and that is right. Dante, AVB, aggregates and
virtual drivers all enumerate as CoreAudio devices, and 64 is a constant WE chose, not a fact about
the world: device_enumerate()'s loop is `(i < count) && (found < max)`, so past 64 it simply stops,
silently.

AND DEVICE_MAX CANNOT SIMPLY BE RAISED. GB_DEVICE_SLOTS is defined as DEVICE_MAX, and the device
parameter is normalised across it - gb_device_slot() and gb_device_normalized() both divide by
GB_DEVICE_SLOTS - 1. So changing 64 re-scales the value saved in every existing project, and a
session reopens pointing at a different device. That is the same trap the offset control's own
comment records for its +/-100 ms range. Whatever the fix is, it has to either keep the divisor at 64
for old states or carry a state version that says which divisor a project was written with.

That turns the ceiling from cosmetic into a REGRESSION RISK, and it is the thing to weigh before
replacing the stepper at all. Whatever else is wrong with a stepper, it can reach every entry in the
list. A menu that cannot show everything makes the tail of the list unreachable - so swapping one for
the other would trade a slow control for an incomplete one.

So if the drop-down is built, an overflow strategy is IN SCOPE, not a later nicety. In cost order:
  - `columns` costs nothing and buys ~48. Use it regardless, but do not treat it as the answer.
  - Capping cellWidth and truncating names buys a third column, ~72. Still an arbitrary ceiling.
  - Scrolling in contextMenu.c has no ceiling. It is a change to SHARED code, so G2-Edit and
    SynthEdit inherit it - which is an argument FOR doing it there rather than against.
  - Or keep the arrows ALONGSIDE the menu, so nothing is ever unreachable however long the list runs.
    Cheapest way to make the regression impossible, and it composes with any of the above.


2026-09-02  RECORDING THE FX ON ITS OWN ABLETON TRACK: NOT AN ATTRIBUTE
------------------------------------------------------------
The todo suspected an attribute presented to the host. Three were checked and eliminated.

silenceFlags - NOT the cause, and worth writing down because it looks like one. The plug-in never
sets outputs[0].silenceFlags, and an FX on a track with no input gets all-silent INPUT flags, so
"host propagates the silence" is a tempting story. JUCE's VST3 wrapper
(juce_audio_plugin_client_VST3.cpp) never touches silenceFlags either, and it ships in thousands of
plug-ins that record in Live. Do not spend time here.

Load-time class/bus attributes - NOT the cause. Live 12.4.5's own log shows both variants restoring
clean: "VST3: plugin processor successfully loaded ... VST3: Restored: GenBridge", no warnings. This
is runtime behaviour, not the class-category rejection G2-Edit hit.

getTailSamples - genuinely WRONG, now fixed, and NOT the cause. It returned a plain 0, i.e.
Vst::kNoTail, which promises that nothing comes out once the input goes silent. True of a reverb,
false of a bridge whose audio arrives from hardware and never came from the input bus - and the FX is
used on a track with nothing feeding it, exactly the state where a host may stop processing a chain
that has promised silence. Now kInfiniteTail for both variants, matching how JUCE maps a generator's
tail, and asserted in vst3check. CT tested: "doesn't work, but also doesn't seem to break anything" -
so it stays as the honest declaration, and it is one variable permanently eliminated.

WHAT IS ACTUALLY LEFT is Live's recording model rather than anything the plug-in declares: an audio
track records its INPUT, not the output of its own device chain. That is why Resampling exists as an
input source. So no attribute can make an effect print onto the track it sits on.

Two routes, and they are a product decision rather than a bug:
  - Document the routing: put GenBridge on track 1, set track 2's "Audio From" to track 1 Post FX,
    arm and record track 2. Or use Resampling. One step, no code.
  - Build a virtual CoreAudio driver, which is what AudioMovers Inject does - "Inject IO" appears as
    a real input and Live records it directly. That is the only way the audio reaches a track input,
    and it is a large piece of work (AudioServerPlugIn), not an attribute change.

DECISIVE TEST if it is ever revisited: watch the panel meters while an armed track records. Audio
moving in the plug-in with an empty recorded clip proves the plug-in is fine and the host is not
capturing device output. Silence in the plug-in too would mean something else entirely.

Related: "freeze / bounce as an instrument" in the todo is the same root from the other end -
OnlyRT in "Fx|NoOfflineProcess|OnlyRT|Tools" excludes the plug-in from everything Live does faster
than realtime, deliberately, because a kOffline bounce cannot work when the ring fills at one second
per second.


2026-09-01  ABSENT SAVED DEVICE FELL THROUGH TO A MICROPHONE
------------------------------------------------------------
Reported by CT: a project whose USB interface is not plugged in came up passing microphone audio.

The controller was the visible half - gbVst3.cpp setComponentState() resolved the saved UID with
gb_slot_for_uid(), and on -1 the `if (slot >= 0)` simply skipped, leaving `device` at its member
default of 0.0, which is slot 0, the first device with inputs. But that was only the near cause. The
real one is that A HOST SAVES THE DEVICE PARAMETER AS A SLOT INDEX, and an index is a position in a
list whose shape changes the moment something is unplugged - so even a correctly saved index names a
different device on reload. Fixing only the controller default would have left that second route open.

The processor was never at fault: reconfigure() already refused to open anything on an unresolved
UID, with a comment recording why. It was being overridden by the parameter.

FIX, and it is NOT the plan todo.txt carried. That plan had the controller hold a waitingForUid and
send the processor a hold message over IConnectionPoint, with a separate signal to tell a genuine
user choice from a host restore. None of that was needed. The processor can tell them apart on its
own: THE FIRST DEVICE PARAMETER TO ARRIVE AFTER A STATE RESTORE IS THE HOST'S, EVERY LATER ONE IS THE
USER'S OR AUTOMATION'S, and both of those are deliberate. deviceParamSeen.exchange(true) is the whole
test. So the saved UID wins exactly once, and no new message, no controller state, and no second
selector had to exist - which also keeps the "the parameter is the only selector" decision intact.

Option A - adding a "none" step to the device parameter and shifting devices to 1..N - was rejected:
it changes what a saved `device` value means, so every project already saved reopens on the wrong
device. A worse bug than the one being fixed.

NOTHING NOTICED HOT-PLUG. The device list is enumerated on demand and the plug-in only asked when a
parameter changed, so a device switched on after the project opened stayed invisible until the user
touched a control - and a plug-in waiting for its saved device would have waited for ever. Added
device_watch_list() in poc/device.c: one CoreAudio kAudioHardwarePropertyDevices listener for the
whole process, fanned out to however many instances are loaded, callbacks copied out under the lock
and called outside it.

The saved state had no device NAME, only UIDs, so a waiting panel could only have shown a CoreAudio
UID. Added an `activename=` key - a new KEY, not a version bump, since the format already skips what
it does not recognise.

TRAP, and it cost the most time here: THE FIRST TWO VERSIONS OF THE REGRESSION TEST PASSED WITH THE
FIX DISABLED. On this machine no audio device opens at all under vst3check - every one is already
claimed - so getLatencySamples() reads zero whether the plug-in tried the microphone or refused to,
and active= only changes on a successful open, so it reads the same both ways. The second version
also swept slots 1-5, which are LATER changes and are meant to be honoured, so it was testing the
opposite of the case. The check now asserts on the plug-in's own log, which is the one place the
DECISION is recorded rather than the outcome, and delivers a single repeated value the way a host
does. Verified as a discriminator: 2 failures with the fix disabled, all pass with it.


2026-09-01  EDITOR RESIZE
-------------------------
checkSizeConstraint() read only the width, so a bottom-edge drag had its requested height discarded
and recomputed from a width that had not changed - the window snapped back and fought the drag. It
now compares both against the current size to see which edge moved. Truncations became lround(): a
host asks repeatedly during a drag and feeds each answer back, so a truncation is a step taken every
time, not a one-off half pixel.

The view repainted only on the 30 Hz meter timer while the host moved the frame at display rate, so
content lagged the window edge - the whole of "not as smooth as G2-Edit", which redraws on demand in
its own loop. -setFrameSize: now redraws immediately.

attached() set NSViewWidthSizable|NSViewHeightSizable AND onSize() setFrame:d, in no guaranteed
order, so every resize passed through a frame of wrong geometry. The mask is now NSViewNotSizable and
onSize() is the only authority - the host is required to call it.

plugFrame was stored and never used. attached() now uses it to ASK for the remembered size when the
host handed over a parent that is not that size, which is the case editor-size persistence would
otherwise still lose. Once, not in a loop.


2026-09-01  RESIZE: CONTENTS ONLY CAUGHT UP WHEN THE DRAG ENDED
---------------------------------------------------------------
Reported by CT after the first resize pass: "the components it contains only seem to be resized after
window resize completes. G2-Edit dynamically resizes them along with the window."

TWO CAUSES, AND THE FIRST ONE WAS MINE. Earlier the same day I removed the plug-in view's
NSViewWidthSizable|NSViewHeightSizable mask, reasoning that AppKit and onSize() both writing the
frame in no guaranteed order was a hazard and that onSize() should be the single authority. That
reasoning ignored WHEN each of them acts: AppKit resizes the view with its parent on every frame of a
live drag, while a host calls onSize() when the drag ENDS. Without the mask the view simply sat at
its old size until the user let go. Measured under vst3host by growing the parent with no onSize()
call - mask on, the subview follows 520x556 -> 640x684; mask off, it stays at 520x556. The mask is
back, and onSize()'s setFrame is now guarded to a no-op when the two already agree, which is what
stops them looking like rival authorities.

The lesson worth keeping: "one authority" is the right instinct for state, and the wrong one for
something two mechanisms update at different RATES. The fast one has to keep running.

SECOND CAUSE, present all along and not mine: CALayer.frame and CAMetalLayer.drawableSize are
ANIMATABLE properties, so a bare assignment enrols them in the default 0.25s implicit action. During
a live drag that is a fresh animation every frame, each starting from where the last had reached -
the window edge moves at once and the contents crawl after it. In a plug-in the layer is a SUBLAYER
of the host view's layer (mtl_attach_window), so nothing lays it out for us and there is no free ride
from the view's own resizing. Both mtl_set_surface() and mtl_attach_window() now wrap their geometry
writes in a CATransaction with setDisableActions:YES.

That change is in SynthLib, so it reaches G2-Edit and SynthEdit as well - both resize a real window
and neither has been looked at since.


2026-09-01  RESIZE, MEASURED (after CT reported it was still jumpy)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Two speculative rounds had already been spent, so this one was measured. Temporary instrumentation in
tools/vst3host drove 60 resize steps as fast as they would go, timing each stage.

  gb_draw_frame (the whole panel)          mean  0.52 ms   worst 10.21 ms
  gfx_present                              mean  3.75 ms   worst 16.11 ms
    of which [gLayer nextDrawable]         mean  3.39 ms   worst 15.44 ms
  mtl_set_surface realloc + GPU wait       mean  0.00 ms   worst  0.00 ms
  whole step                               mean 16.30 ms

WHAT WAS WRONG WITH THE GUESSES. Reallocating the render targets and the waitUntilCompleted inside
mtl_set_surface looked like the obvious cost - a 16 MB MSAA texture per drag frame - and measured
zero. Suppressing the 30 Hz timer during the drag, which looked like a certain win, moved the mean by
0.06 ms. Neither was the problem.

WHAT THE NUMBERS ACTUALLY SAY: drawing is free, and every millisecond is nextDrawable waiting for the
display. That is CORRECT back-pressure - a loop that redraws flat out cannot present faster than the
screen refreshes, and the harness redraws flat out. So the render path is comfortably inside budget
and is NOT the source of the jumpiness, and the harness cannot tell a smooth resize from a rough one.

THE HARNESS IS THE WRONG INSTRUMENT and that is worth remembering before building another one: a
synthetic resize loop measures the presentation ceiling, not the drag. What it did prove is where the
time is NOT, which is what stopped a third round of guessing at the renderer.

REAL DEFECT FOUND AND FIXED, in the geometry negotiation rather than the drawing: checkSizeConstraint
took whichever dimension had changed MORE. `width`/`height` only advance when onSize() arrives, which
for many hosts is when the drag ENDS, so the comparison runs against the pre-drag size and on a corner
drag near the diagonal a few pixels of wobble flips which dimension wins. Each flip is a different
answer for the same pointer position. It now asks only whether the width is moving, which has no tie
to break.

STILL OPEN. Kept because they are right, not because they were shown to help: the timer standing down
during a live resize, and draw+present sharing one CATransaction so the layer cannot show its new
geometry with the previous frame's pixels. One structural difference from G2-Edit remains unexplored -
gPresentInTransaction is TRUE for a plug-in (attached to a VIEW) and FALSE for the app (attached to an
NSWindow), so the plug-in takes the synchronous commit/waitUntilScheduled/present path and G2-Edit,
the thing being compared against, does not. That wait sits inside AppKit's drag loop.


2026-09-01  RESIZE, THIRD PASS - "resizes randomly and restores" MID-DRAG
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Much better after the measured pass, but CT then reported the whole plug-in WINDOW occasionally
jumping to another size and back, while dragging.

A window changing size is something ASKING the host for a size. Only two things here can:
plugFrame->resizeView(), which runs once in attached() and so is ruled out by "while dragging"; and
checkSizeConstraint(), whose answer the host applies.

checkSizeConstraint() was made HISTORY-FREE. Both previous versions consulted the size the plug-in
believed it was at - and `width`/`height` only advance when onSize() arrives, and are themselves set
from earlier answers - so the reply to a given rect depended on what had come before it. A host that
asks twice about one pointer position, or proposes the pointer's raw rect whose unmoved dimension
still holds the pre-drag value, could get two different answers and apply both. The rule is now the
average of the two candidate widths: idempotent, so feeding an answer back returns it unchanged and
the size cannot oscillate; continuous, so there is no branch to flip and no tie to break.

CT reports the oscillation gone after this change. That is the outcome wanted, and it is still not
proof of the mechanism: the fault was intermittent, so an absence over one session is weak evidence,
and no log of a failing drag was ever captured to say what the host was actually asking for.

DO NOT RECORD THIS AS THE FIX. The mechanism above is a plausible story, not a demonstrated one. The
regression checks added to vst3check PASS WITH BOTH OF THE OLD RULES, so they do not reproduce the
fault - that is now the THIRD test in this area built on a guess at the host's behaviour and unable
to tell right from wrong. The pattern is clear enough to name: resize is negotiated between host and
plug-in over a sequence of calls that cannot be inferred from the code, and reasoning about it in the
armchair has been wrong every single time.

WHAT TO DO NEXT, AND IT IS NOT ANOTHER GUESS. gb_editor_log() now records every checkSizeConstraint
in/out and every onSize, behind the same /tmp/genbridge-log gate as the processor. Reproduce the jump
with the gate on and read the sequence. The answer is in that log; it has never been in the source.
